In this chapter I will elaborate on the example from the
[Introduction](#why-pandocomatic) about using pandocomatic to configure and
run pandoc for a series of related research papers.

In 2010 I started a PhD project in mathematics education on [exploring
instantaneous speed in grade 5](https://heerdebeer.org/DR/). Before I started
this project I used [LaTeX](https://www.latex-project.org/) for all my
writings in history, computer science, science education, and also to create
educational materials I used when I taught computer science in high school. I
like LaTeX, in particular because of its readable plain text formal and the
ability to create my own commands and environments. And so long as I was
writing papers for print, I could not think of better tool for me.

However, times were changing and print became more and more a secondary output
format. The web took precedence. Generating a well-formatted HTML page from a
LaTeX source document appeared harder than it ought to be. I tried tools like
[latex2html](http://www.latex2html.org/) and
[tex4ht](https://tug.org/applications/tex4ht/mn.html), but it was always a
hassle to use and the output not that great. 

Meanwhile I started collaborating on papers. Most of of my colleagues had not
heard of LaTeX, and, to be honest, why would they care? I was the one using
"odd software" in my field and even if I could convince them to go the LaTeX
route, the frustration that would cause is not worth the trouble. In the end
writing is about *writing* not about tools or processes.

Still, I did not want to give up on my workflow either: I like working with
plain text with tools like [vim](http://www.vim.org/), version control,
[grep](https://www.gnu.org/software/grep/), and so on.
